Tyler/firmware shell (#106)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/firmware-shell.md

Basics]({% post_url 2019-10-08-unit-testing-basics %}#basic-implementation-of-keyvalue-store).
This command will take two arguments from the user, a key and value, and work in
the following way:

```
$ kv_write device_name "Device ABCD"
> OK
```

We need to write a function for the command now, which will call
`kv_store_write()` with our key and value.

```c
int cli_cmd_kv_write(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  // We expect 3 arguments:
  // 1. Command name
  // 2. Key
  // 3. Value
  if (argc != 3) {
    shell_put_line("> FAIL,1");
  }

  const char *key = argv[1];
  const char *value = argv[2];

  bool result = kv_store_write(key, value, strlen(value));
  if (!result) {
    shell_put_line("> FAIL,2");
  }
  shell_put_line("> OK");
  return 0;
}
```

> NOTE: Notice that we use a different FAIL code for each failure case. This is
> to assist in debugging when a failure is hit.

The final part would be to add it to the list within `shell_commands.c`.

````c
static const sShellCommand s_shell_commands[] = {
  {"kv_write", cli_cmd_kv_write, "Write a Key/Value pair"},  // Added!
  {"hello", cli_cmd_hello, "Say hello"},
  {"help", shell_help_handler, "Lists all commands"},
};

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

---
title: Building a Tiny CLI Shell for Tiny Firmware

> description:

Reviewer 2: just noting, still need a description (and thumbnail)

#### Help Command

You may have noticed there is a `help` command in our shell. This allows the
user to type `help` into the shell and get a list of all the commands that are
available, along with the `char *help` string that was passed into the
registration table.

```
shell> help
hello: Say hello
help: Lists all commands
```

You can find the full source of the help command
[on Github](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt/blob/master/example/firmware-shell/complex/shell/src/shell.c#L148-L156)

### Command Arguments

In our Hello World command, there were two arguments, `int argc` and
`char *argv[]`, which we skimmed over.

```c
int cli_cmd_hello(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  shell_put_line("Hello World!");
  return 0;
}
```

These might seem cryptic at first, but this is the standard way to passing
command-line arguments to C/C++ programs.[^command_line_args]

**argc** - number of strings pointed to by `argv`<br> **argv** - 1 plus the
number of arguments passed to the function. The first argument is the command
name.<br>

To further understand how these two arguments work together in our shell, let's
build a command called `kv_write` that could hook into the Key/Value Store from

> a previous Interrupt post, [Unit Testing

Reviewer 2: this link doesn't appear to have rendered right

static const sShellCommand s_shell_commands[] = {
  {"kv_write", cli_cmd_kv_write, "Write a Key/Value pair"},  // Added!
  {"hello", cli_cmd_hello, "Say hello"},
  {"help", shell_help_handler, "Lists all commands"},
};
```

## Automating Shell Interaction with Python

One of the neatest things about building a formatted and consistent shell
interface is that you can then automate interactions with it! Using our example
code above running on our nRF52, the following code will connect to the serial
port, write the command `help`, capture the output, and print that to the user.

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

import serial
import io

# Connect to a device matching what we want
port = list(list_ports.grep(r"/dev/cu.usbmodem*"))[0]
ser = serial.Serial(port.device, 115200, timeout=1)
sio = io.TextIOWrapper(io.BufferedRWPair(ser, ser))

# Write our command and send immediately
sio.write("hello\n")
sio.flush()

# Our serial implementation prints the input to the shell
command = sio.readline()
# Read the response on the next line
response = sio.readline()
# output to user
print(response)
````

Here's what happens when we run this script:

```
$ python auto_serial.py
Hello World!
```

> The ability opens up a huge amount of automation opportunities. By using scripts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This ability opens up a huge amount of automation opportunities. By using scripts
```

to interact with the shell, you can easily:

- Read the values of arbitrary variables and regions of RAM or flash for
  inspection without the use of a debugger.
- Send and receive files from a device's file system.
- Run a suite of automated tests, all of which are individual shell commands
  that return success codes.
- Perform before and after analysis on heaps, battery life, etc. when running
  automated tests.

> - Manage a large number of devices connected to a single computer.s

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Manage a large number of devices connected to a single computer.
```

a - build/test_shell_commands/objs/interrupt/example/firmware-shell/complex/shell_commands.o
Linking build/test_shell_commands/test_shell_commands_tests
Running build/test_shell_commands/test_shell_commands_tests
.
OK (1 tests, 1 ran, 1 checks, 0 ignored, 0 filtered out, 0 ms)
```

For more reference, it's worth checking out how the
[Memfault Firmware SDK](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/master/tests/src/test_memfault_demo_cli.cpp)
and
[Skip Scooter's Anchor](https://github.com/rideskip/anchor/tree/master/console/tests)
libraries test their command-line implementations.

## Tips and Considerations

### Formatted Output

There are two consumers of a device's shell: a developer and a machine hooked up
to the device through serial. Therefore, an output format should be both human
and machine-readable.

I suggest that all commands succeed or fail in the same way, either printing
`OK` or `FAIL,<code>`. It might help to build helper functions that do this for
you:

```c
void shell_result_success(void) {
  shell_put_line("> OK");
}

void shell_result_fail(int code) {
  char buf[32];
  snprint(buf, sizeof(buf), "> FAIL,%d", code);
  shell_put_line(buf);
}

```

> One common format that is used in CSV, which is mostly readable depending on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One common format that is used is CSV, which is mostly readable depending on
```

what is being output. Below, we show an example of a `dump_heap` command which
would spit out a CSV, which a developer could then copy into Excel or Google
Sheets and do further inspections.

```
$ dump_heap
addr,size
0x00200000,64
0x00200040,128
...
```

If you are trying to output files or raw binary buffers into the shell, I
recommend using base64 or hexdump encoding, which will make it easier for
automated systems to ingest and convert the output.

### Extra Shell Features

Every developer loves a full-featured shell. These features might include being
able to backspace and delete keys, use the left and right arrow keys for
in-place editing, Emacs shortcuts, command history and completion, argument
parsing, and help menus.

To learn how to add some of these features to your project's shell, it's best to
look at a few open-source projects. Unfortunately, there aren't many _great_
shell's publicly available for tiny firmware.

- [Zephyr Shell](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/master/subsys/shell)
- [Skip Scooters Anchor Console](https://github.com/rideskip/anchor/tree/master/console)

> 

Reviewer 2: The esp-idf shell does some neat stuff too. A lot of it is offloaded to the desktop:  https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/blob/master/tools/idf_monitor.py#L3-L10

console source itself is here https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/master/components/console

#### Different Firmware

The most secure way to lock down the shell is to not include the shell at all.
Simple, but it will severely limit your ability to debug a faulty production
device should you receive one from customer support.

## When Not To Build a CLI Shell

No article would be useful without the counter-arguments. I've seen a few times
where having a CLI shell over serial was **not** the tool for the job. It might
be worth the time to invest in building something else if:

- The connection to the device is not reliable. You'll need to be able to detect
  dropped bytes and attempt retries.
- The footprint and breadth of the CLI has gotten too big, and it would be
  better to have most of the strings, help menus, argument parsing, and error
  checking be contained with a host-side application.
- You need to maintain multiple connections to a single device over a single
  serial port.
- You are sure that any consumer of the interface (developers, QA, factory
  harnesses) will use the tools your team builds. In this case, I would
  definitely go for the binary protocol route.

## Final Thoughts

As an evangelist for developer productivity, I love finding repeated tasks and

> automated the processes, whether that is in the firmware shell, a [project CLI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
automating the processes, whether that is in the firmware shell, a [project CLI
```

on the host
machine]({% post_url 2019-08-27-building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects %}), or in
[the
debugger]({% post_url 2019-07-02-automate-debugging-with-gdb-python-api %}).

> I hope this post was found to be useful and help tell the story why having a
> developer-focused interface into a firmware-based device is helpful. I'd love to

Reviewer 2: maybe: sentence seems a little wordy, perhaps drop first part
```suggestion
I hope this post conveyed the reasons why having a developer-focused interface into a firmware-based device is helpful. I'd love to
```
